Although lamb shanks have become chic and expensive, you could easily make this tagine with boneless lamb shoulder cut into chunks to keep the cost low. It's just as delicious. Serves 6 2.5kg of lamb shanks, or 1.8kg of boneless lamb shoulder, trimmed of fat2 tbsp butter2 medium onions, thickly slicedPinch of saffron threads6 garlic cloves, choppedA thumb-size piece of ginger, peeled and slivered1 small cinnamon stick1 tsp coriander seeds1 tsp cumin seeds1 tbsp ground ginger1-2 tsp ground cayenne pepper150g golden raisins300g pitted prunes750ml chicken broth or water300g chopped tomatoesSalt and black pepper For the garnish1 tbsp butter200g blanched whole almondsLarge pinch of saltSmall pinch of sugar 1 Preheat the oven to 160C/325F/gas mark 3. Season the lamb generously with salt and pepper, then set aside. 2 Melt the butter in a large frying pan. Add the onions, sprinkle with a little salt and crumble the saffron on top. Sweat the onions gently for about 5 minutes or until slightly softened. Remove from the heat and stir in the garlic, fresh ginger, cinnamon stick, coriander and cumin seeds, powdered ginger and cayenne pepper. Add the raisins and half the prunes. 3 Put the lamb in a deep casserole and spread the onion mixture over the meat. Add the broth or water and tomatoes, and cover the pot with foil and a tight-fitting lid. Bake for about 2 hours or until the meat is tender. 4 Take the dish from the oven and remove the foil and lid. Add the rest of the prunes and submerge them in the liquid. Raise the heat to 200C/400F/gas mark 6 and return the lamb to the oven, uncovered, for about 15 minutes to let the meat brown a bit. Remove the pot from the oven and let it rest for 10 minutes or so. 5 Skim off any fat from the surface of the tagine. Reduce the sauce if it seems thin. The tagine is ready to serve but will reheat perfectly, so you can make it today to serve the next day: the sauce will mature beautifully in the refrigerator overnight. 6 Just before you serve the tagine, heat the butter in a small frying pan over a medium heat and gently fry the almonds, stirring occasionally. When they turn golden, dry them on a paper towel and sprinkle with salt and sugar. 7 To serve, transfer the stew to a large platter and scatter the fried almonds over the lamb. • From Heart of the Artichoke by David Tanis (Artisan Books). There must be scores of recipes similar to this one in Provence alone, not to mention all of those that have been borrowed by other regions, for a daube of beef is essentially a country housewife's dish. In some daubes the meat is cut up, in others it is cooked in one piece; what goes in and the way it is served is largely a question of local taste. Serves 4 2 tbsp olive oil170g unsmoked streaky bacon or salt pork, cubed2 carrots, scraped and sliced2 onions, peeled and sliced2 tomatoes, skinned and sliced90g fresh pork rinds, cut into small squares900g top rump beef, cut into 9cm squares, 1cm thick2 garlic cloves Bouquet of thymeA strip of orange peel1 bay leaf1 glass of red wineSalt and black pepper For the garnish1 garlic clove, finely choppedFresh parsley, chopped1 anchovy (optional)A few capers (optional) 1 Add the olive oil, bacon, vegetables and half the pork rinds to a large casserole. Arrange the beef carefully on top, so the slices are overlapping each other. 2 Flatten the garlic cloves and bury them beneath the meat. Insert the orange peel and bay leaf into the centre of the thyme bouquet and place beneath the meat. Season and arrange the rest of the pork rinds over the top. 3 With the pan uncovered on top of the stove, start cooking on a moderate heat. 4 Preheat the oven to 140C/275F/gas mark 1. 5 After about 10 minutes, put the wine into another saucepan, bring it to a fast boil, set light to the vapours and rotate the pan so that the flames spread. When they have died down, pour the bubbling wine over the meat. 6 Cover the pot with greaseproof paper or foil and a well-fitting lid. Transfer to the oven and leave for 2½ hours. 7 Arrange the meat on a hot dish, pour off some of the fat from the sauce, extract the bouquet and pour the sauce around the meat. 8 A garnish of finely chopped garlic and parsley, with perhaps an anchovy and a few capers, can be sprinkled over the top. • Recipe adapted from French Provincial Cooking by Elizabeth David (Penguin Books). Order a copy for £11.99 with free UK p&p (save £3) from guardianbookshop.co.uk or call 0330 333 6846. If you have always wanted to add some sharpness to those slow-cooked, stewy dishes, something to break down their heavy seriousness and introduce a little refreshing edge – a bit of humour even – then this recipe will be right up your street. It packs in heaps of sharpness, right from the start, in the form of tamarind and chard. That's followed up with the juice of a whole lemon at the end. Or, if you're feeling adventurous, some chilli flakes will also give it a lovely kick. Serves 4 4 tbsp seedless tamarind pulp400g swiss chard, cut into 1cm slices 1½ tsp coriander seeds1 medium onion, thinly sliced2 tsp caraway seeds1½ tbsp olive oil, plus extra to finish1 tbsp tomato puree400g can plum tomatoes, cut up with their juices350ml water1½ tbsp caster sugarSalt and black pepper400g chickpeas For the rice350g short-grain rice20g butter700ml water To finishJuice of 1 lemon200g Greek yoghurt (optional)Coriander leaves 1 Whisk the tamarind with about 3 tbsp of warm water until it dissolves into a paste. Set aside. Bring a medium pot of salted water to the boil and blanch the chard for 2 minutes. Drain in a colander. 2 Dry-roast the coriander seeds in a small pan then transfer to a mortar and pestle to grind them into a powder. 3 Put the onion, caraway seeds and olive oil in a large heavy-based pan and saute on a medium heat for about 1 minute until the onion is soft and golden. Add the tomato puree and stir for another minute or so. Add the tomatoes, water, sugar, chickpeas, ground coriander, chard and some salt and pepper. 4 Strain the tamarind water through a small sieve into the stew. Bring to the boil, then cover with a lid and leave to simmer for about 30 minutes. When ready, the dish should have the consistency of a thick soup. You can adjust this either by adding more water or simmering uncovered, so the excess liquid can evaporate. Taste and add more seasoning if you think it's needed. 5 While the stew is cooking, put the rice, butter and a bit of salt in a medium pan and set on a medium heat. Stir to coat the rice with butter. Add the water and bring to the boil, then cover the pan with a tight-fitting lid and leave to simmer on a low flame for 15‑20 minutes. Remove from the heat and leave uncovered for 5 minutes. 6 When it's ready to serve, spoon the rice into shallow soup bowls, creating a large crater in the centre. Add the lemon juice to the stew and stir, then spoon one or two ladles into the middle of the rice for each bowl. Put a dollop of yoghurt on top if you like. Drizzle with oil and finish with a generous helping of coriander leaves. • From Plenty by Yotam Ottolenghi (Ebury Press). Order a copy for £20 with free UK p&p (save £5) from guardianbookshop.co.uk or call 0330 333 6846 The method here is very straightforward. The rabbit is stewed in practically nothing but its own juices and then simmered in white wine with a little rosemary and a touch of tomato. It's a familiar northern Italian approach which draws out the delicate flavour of the rabbit while also maintaining its fine texture. It's best to use farmed rabbit as it's a softer meat than wild rabbit, which is more gamey. Serves 6 8 tbsp olive oil1 small celery stick, finely diced1 garlic clove, peeled1.3-1.6kg farmed rabbit, sliced150ml white wineA sprig of fresh rosemary1 stock cube2 tbsp tomato puree¼ tsp sugar150ml warm waterSalt and black pepper 1 If you're using fresh rabbit rather than frozen, soak it in cold water for 12 hours or more and then rinse several times and pat dry. It can be refrigerated while it's soaking. 2 Choose a deep, covered frying pan large enough to contain all the meat in a single layer. Add the oil, celery, garlic and rabbit. Cover and cook over a low heat for 2 hours. Turn the meat a few times, but do not leave uncovered. 3 After 2 hours, you will find that the rabbit has shed a great deal of liquid. Uncover the pan, turn up the heat to medium and cook until all the liquid has evaporated, turning the meat from time to time. 4 Add the wine, rosemary, salt and pepper. Simmer, uncovered, until the wine has completely evaporated. 5 Dissolve the stock cube, tomato puree and sugar in 150ml of warm water, pour it over the rabbit and cook gently for another 12-15 minutes, turning and basting the rabbit two or three times. Serve immediately. • From The Classic Italian Cookbook by Marcella Hazan (Macmillan) When you have little time but want something nourishing, this is a quick and easy recipe that won't disappoint. It works with all sorts of beans and can be made vegetarian by using vegetable stock and replacing the bacon with black olives. Serves 4 4 tbsp olive oil6 bacon rashers, chopped2 garlic cloves, chopped¼ tsp fennel seeds400g can chopped tomatoes200ml chicken stock400g can cannellini beans150g cos lettuce, choppedSalt and black pepper 1 Heat the olive oil in a pan and add the bacon. Cook for a few minutes, then add the garlic and fennel seeds. 2 Pour in the tinned tomatoes and cook on a high heat for 5 minutes. 3 Add the stock and the drained beans, then cook for a further 5 minutes. 4 Season well, add the chopped lettuce, and allow it to wilt before serving. 5 Drizzle with olive oil and sprinkle with lots of black pepper. • Adapted from Leon: Naturally Fast Food by Henry Dimbleby and John Vincent (Conran Octopus). Order a copy for £13 with free UK p&p (save £7) from guardianbookshop.co.uk or call 0330 333 6846. This delicious Greek-inspired lamb, squash and orzo stew is tender, rich and sweet – and very hard to stop scooping up by the spoonful. You may sniff at using dried mint in the yoghurt, but it works far better than fresh in delivering a cooling punch to counterbalance the richness of the stew. Serves 4 For the stockBones removed from lamb shoulder1 litre cold water10 peppercornsSalt 2-3 leek ends Handful of thyme sprigs2 bay leaves2 carrots, halved1 courgette, halved1 onion, peeled and halved1 stick celery, halvedHandful of parsley stalks For the lamb stewA glug of olive oil2 onions, peeled and sliced2 cinnamon sticksA pinch dried oreganoLeaves from 2 thyme sprigs1kg lamb shoulder, cut into roughly 4cm cubes and trimmed of excess fat400g can plum tomatoes400g squash, peeled and cut into large cubes200g orzoHandful of grated parmesanSalt and black pepper For the minted yoghurtGreek or natural yoghurt1 tbsp dried mint1 tsp white wine vinegar 1 First make the lamb stock. If you're asking your butcher to dice and trim the lamb for you, ask to keep the bones for the stock pot. Put the bones in a saucepan with the cold water, peppercorns and 2 large pinches of salt and bring slowly to the boil. Then add the rest of the stock ingredients. Simmer for 2 hours, skimming off any froth every now and then. Strain through a sieve and set to one side. 2 Preheat the oven to 160C/325F/gas mark 3. Warm a glug of olive oil in a large flameproof casserole and add the onions, cinnamon sticks, oregano and thyme. Once the onions start to soften, add the lamb and stir. Once lightly browned, add a big pinch of salt and some black pepper. 3 Add the tomatoes and top the pan up with stock until the meat is just submerged. Cover the pan and place in the oven for 2 hours. 4 Forty minutes before the end of cooking time, stir in the squash, re-cover and return to the oven. Twenty minutes before the end of cooking time, do the same with the orzo. Once 2 hours is up, remove from the oven, top with parmesan and leave to cool for 5–10 minutes. 5 Mix the yoghurt, mint and vinegar in a bowl and serve with the pot of stew. • Adapted from Kitchen & Co by French & Grace (Kyle Books). Order a copy for £13.59 with free UK p&p (save £3.40) from guardianbookshop.co.uk or call 0330 333 6846. This is an exceptionally rich dish that provides plenty of belly warmth. Smoky and intense, it's perfect for ladling into big bowls alongside big hunks of sourdough and big glasses of red wine. You can also tweak the recipe by adding kale, spinach or cabbage in the last 5 minutes to bring the richness down a notch or two. Quality meat makes all the difference, and the salt and spices in the chorizo and morcelo will bring the stew alive. There's no need for salt and pepper or any extra oil – it all comes from the pork. If the fat worries you, make the stew a day in advance, refrigerate overnight and skim it from the surface before reheating. Definitely not something to be eaten every day – once a year, when the tips of your fingers can bear the cold no more, should be about right. Serves 4–6 200g salted pork bellyA splash of extra virgin olive oil2 small white onions, finely sliced2 fresh bay leaves4 fresh sage leaves, roughly chopped220g chorizo picante, sliced into 1cm diagonals100g morcelo black pudding, skinned and sliced2 garlic cloves, finely chopped400g can plum tomatoes750ml boiling water2 x 400g can butter beans, drainedHandful of fresh parsley 1 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Rinse and skin the pork belly, remove the top layer of fat and cut into rough cubes. Add to a flameproof casserole with a splash of olive oil and set over a medium-low heat. Add the onions, bay and sage leaves and let everything sweat for about 10 minutes, until the onions have gone soft and are starting to colour. 2 In a small saucepan, heat the chorizo on a low heat until it releases its oils. When it is rust coloured, remove with a slotted spoon and add to the pork belly, onions and herbs. Keep everything moving for a few minutes. 3 Crumble the morcelo slices into another small saucepan and add the garlic. After 5 minutes, pour the plum tomatoes through your hands and into the saucepan, breaking them up as you go. Add the boiling water and 1 tin of butter beans. Bring to the boil, then remove from the heat. 4 Wipe the chorizo saucepan clean with a paper towel then transfer 1 tbsp of liquid from the stew pot to the pan, along with 1 tbsp of water. Set aside. Cover the stew with a tight lid and place in the oven for 2 hours, or until the pork belly is soft and rendered. 5 Ten minutes before the end of the cooking time, add the second tin of butter beans to the reserved liquid in the small saucepan. Heat through on low with a splash of olive oil. Crush the beans to a coarse paste with a fork, spoon straight into bowls and top with ladles of stew and chopped fresh parsley. • From Kitchen & Co by French and Grace (Kyle Books). Order a copy for £13.59 with free UK p&p (save £3.40) from guardianbookshop.co.uk or call 0330 333 6846. This stew works brilliantly with grilled venison or roast duck. The vanilla and the pandan – often referred to as the vanilla of Asia – complement each other beautifully, creating an aromatic, slightly smoky flavour. Omit the pandan if you cannot find it, but it is worth seeking out. Fresh borlotti beans are used in this recipe, but you could also use flageolet or haricot beans. Serves 4 50g unsalted butter2 banana shallots, finely diced1 small leek, finely diced½ fennel bulb, finely diced1 small carrot, peeled and halved lengthways1 small celery stick, cut into thirds½ pandan leaf1kg fresh borlotti beans, removed from their pods1 bay leaf100ml white wine1 vanilla podSalt and black pepper 1 Melt the butter in a pan over a moderate heat. Once it begins to bubble, add the shallots, leek, fennel, carrot and celery and saute until soft. 2 Scrunch up the pandan leaf with your hands and add this to the pan along with the borlotti beans, bay leaf, white wine and enough water to barely cover the beans. Cover with a lid and leave to simmer gently for 30 minutes or so, until the beans are tender. 3 Once the beans are all but cooked, slit the vanilla pod lengthways and scrape out the seeds. Add the pod and seeds to the stew and cook for a further 15 minutes. Season to taste with salt and black pepper. • From The Modern Pantry by Anna Hansen (Ebury Press). Order a copy for £20 with free UK p&p (save £5) from guardianbookshop.co.uk or call 0330 333 6846. Quick and easy, this flavour-packed dish makes the ideal midweek supper. Serves 2 1 tbsp olive oil1 large onion, thinly sliced1 tsp garlic, crushed185ml dry white wine400g can chopped tomatoes3 tbsp tomato pureeGrated zest of 1 orange½ to 1 tbsp of fennel seeds1 tbsp fresh thyme or 1 tsp dried thyme1 small bay leaf350g fish fillets cut into 5cm cubesBoiled potatoes to serveSalt and black pepper 1 Heat the olive oil in a large non-stick pan. Add the onion and garlic and cook until it softens and begins to brown. 2 Add the wine, tomatoes, puree, orange zest, fennel seeds, thyme and bay leaf. Season with salt and pepper. Cook covered for 10 minutes. 3 Add the fish and cook for 2 to 3 minutes until the fish is done. Serve over boiled potatoes. • Recipe from Marian Burros appearing in the Essential New York Times Cook Book by Amanda Hesser (WW Norton). Order a copy for £24 with free UK p&p (save £6) from guardianbookshop.co.uk or call 0330 333 6846. This classic French recipe is packed full of flavour and will make the perfect dinner party dish or an alternative to the Sunday roast. Serves 4 30g butter1 tbsp sunflower oil1.5kg chicken, cut into 8 serving pieces125g streaky bacon rashers, cut into strips8 small shallots or pickling onions250g button mushrooms30g plain flour300ml chicken stock600ml red wine1 bouquet garni1 large garlic clove, crushedSalt and black pepper2 tbsp chopped parsley to garnish 1 Melt the butter with the oil in a flameproof casserole. Add the chicken and cook for 10-12 minutes until browned. Lift out and drain on paper towels. 2 Add the bacon, shallots or onions and mushrooms. Cook over a high heat, stirring until golden brown. Lift the mixture out of the pan with a slotted spoon and leave to drain thoroughly on paper towels. 3 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4.Add the flour to the pan and cook for 3-5 minutes, stirring constantly, until lightly browned. In a separate pan, reduce the wine to half its original volume. Gradually add the stock to the flour, followed by the wine, stirring until smooth. 4 Return the chicken and bacon mixture to the casserole. Add the bouquet garni and garlic. Season with salt and pepper. Bring to a boil, cover, then transfer to the oven for 45 minutes or until tender when pierced with a fork. Sprinkle the chicken with the parsley. • From The Mary Berry Winter Cookbook (Dorling Kindersley)