Sweet, acidic tomatoes, a gutsy salsa and peppery rocket all provide a vibrant backdrop for the rich, chargrilled squid in this summery supper. Ask your fishmonger to clean the squid for you. Serves 4 200ml extra virgin olive oil250g cherry tomatoesA small handful of fresh parsley, roughly choppedA large handful of fresh basil 4 anchovies1 tbsp capers2 small garlic cloves1 chilli, chopped1½ tbsp red wine vinegar500g squidTwo large handfuls of rocket1 lemon, cut into wedgesSalt and black pepper 1 Season the squid with salt and pepper and toss in 1 tbsp of the olive oil. In a separate bowl, do the same with the cherry tomatoes. 2 Heat a large grill pan over a high flame for at least 3 minutes until smoking hot. Meanwhile, whizz the herbs, anchovies, capers, garlic, chilli and 1 tbsp vinegar into a paste. Slowly pour in the oil until you have a thick sauce. Taste and adjust the seasoning. 3 Add the squid to the pan and cook for about 30-40 seconds on each side, until the flesh just turns opaque. Transfer to a serving plate. 4 Add the tomatoes to the pan, cooking them for 2-3 minutes until they are browning on the outside and bursting a little. Pour in the remaining ½ tbsp red wine vinegar and sizzle. 5 Serve the squid tossed with the cherry tomatoes and the rocket. Pour the salsa verde over the top and serve with a few wedges of lemon on the side. Fresh bread is an essential to mop it all up. thomasinamiers.com; wahaca.co.uk This is wonderfully filling, tasty and a bit special, even though it's simple to make. The garnishes really make it. I like plain tortilla crisps for their crunch, but you could use fajitas if you prefer, and you could substitute pink beans such as pintos. It's easiest to make if the beans you use aren't too firm: softer ones are easier to mash. Serves 4For the beans2 tbsp olive oil3 x 400g cans red kidney beans2 garlic cloves, crushed3 large juicy tomatoes, chopped½–1 tsp ground cuminDried red chilli flakesSalt and black pepper To serve2 little gem lettuces1 lime, cut into wedgesTortilla chipsFresh coriander, finely chopped 1 red onion, finely choppedA tub of soured cream 1 avocado, cut into chunksA handful of cheddar cheese, grated 1 Heat the olive oil in a large frying pan, wok, or saucepan. Meanwhile, drain the beans, saving the liquid. 2 Put the beans into the pan, and while they're over the heat break them up to make a rough mash that's creamy but has lots of texture – add a little of the reserved liquid if necessary. 3 Stir in the garlic, chopped tomatoes, cumin and chilli flakes, salt and pepper to taste. Cook over a gentle heat for about 5 minutes, until everything is heated through. 4 Meanwhile, put the accompaniments into serving bowls, and arrange the little gem leaves around a shallow platter. Spoon the beans on to the platter and garnish with lime. 5 Surround the platter with the bowls of accompaniments and let everyone help themselves. The Best of Rose Elliot: The Ultimate Vegetarian Collection by Rose Elliot (Hamlyn) Broad beans are among my favourite vegetables and this dish makes the most of them. It's best with the first little broad beans of the year, so tender that they don't require skinning, and need only the very briefest dunk in hot water to cook. Fresh baby peas are a great, similarly fast-cooking alternative, and you could use bacon in place of the chorizo, though I love its spicy flavour with the bittersweet beans. Serves 2250g baby broad beans1 tbsp olive oil100g cooking chorizo, sliced or dicedSourdough, toasted 1 Bring a pan of salted water to the boil, throw in the broad beans and cook for just 2 minutes, then drain them well. 2 Meanwhile, heat the olive oil in a small frying pan over a medium heat, add the chorizo and fry for a minute or so until lightly crisp. Throw the drained beans into the pan with the chorizo and toss for a minute, so the beans are heated through and coated with the delicious, spicy red oil. Serve at once, with bread, or piled on to toasted garlic-rubbed sourdough as a bruschetta.rivercottage.net I live near a late-night newsagent-cum-grocery. Large areas of it are devoted to bottles of fizzy drinks, sweets, long-life breads and cleaning fluid. The freezer is full of pizza and there's no fresh meat. But I like our cobbled-together dinners from across the road, and this is a favourite "over the road" recipe, needing only basic ingredients. Serves 2-34 tbsp extra virgin olive oil400g chopped tomatoes2 pinches of dried oregano½ tsp ground coriander seed225g feta cheese, drained and cut into 2cm cubes¼-½ tsp smoked paprikaFlat-leaf parsley, choppedBlack pepper To servePitta bread, toasted and cut into strips 1 Choose a pan with a well-fitting lid. Heat the oil until it is just beginning to release white smoke and quickly add the tomatoes. Put the lid on quickly – they will sizzle and splash. Leave the lid on the pan until the sizzling dies down, then add the oregano and coriander. 2 Simmer for about 8 minutes, then add the cheese. Swirl a little with a spoon. 3 When the cheese begins to melt, remove from the heat, sprinkle over the paprika and season with black pepper. Scatter over the parsley and serve with toasted pitta bread. Kitchenella by Rose Prince (Fourth Estate). To buy a copy for £20.80 (RRP £26) visit guardianbookshop.co.uk or call 0330 333 6846 Simplicity and balance are the main themes here, with the sharp feta and creamy aubergine enhanced by the classic pairing of garlic and parsley. Serves 250ml olive oil, plus a splash for grilling1 aubergine, thinly sliced lengthways1 garlic clove, finely chopped1 tbsp flat-leaf parsley, chopped2 tbsp panko breadcrumbs, toasted1 tbsp pine nuts, toasted1 tbsp golden raisins200g feta cheeseA small bunch of mint leaves, torn 1 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Heat a splash of olive oil in a grill pan and season. Cook the aubergine for a couple of minutes on each side, then place it in the oven for 4 minutes. 2 In the same pan, heat 50ml olive oil. Add the garlic, parsley and breadcrumbs, toasted pine nuts and golden raisins. 3 Pour on top of the aubergines and finish with the crumbled feta and a sprinkling of torn mint leaves. The textures of the mussels, chickpeas and fennel are excellent together, and the fragrant tomato and feta sauce that surrounds them makes for something special. Not bad for 10 minutes at the stove. Serves 4 50ml extra virgin olive oil plus extra to finish5 spring onions, sliced (green parts too)½ fennel bulb, sliced thinly½ tsp fennel seeds2 garlic cloves, sliced2 bay leaves250ml passata50ml white wine½ tsp sugar200g canned chickpeas, drained1kg mussels, cleaned150g feta, crumbled1 handful flat-leaf parsley, shredded2 handfuls dill, choppedSalt and pepper 1 Heat a wide saucepan with a lid over a high heat. Add the olive oil and when hot, but not smoking, add the spring onions, fennel, fennel seeds, garlic and bay and season with salt and pepper. Fry for 3 minutes, stirring occasionally, then add the passata, white wine, sugar and chickpeas, and cook for another 2 minutes. 2 Now add the mussels, stir twice, put on the lid and steam, still over a high heat, until they open. Remove from the heat, stir in the crumbled feta, parsley and dill, and check for seasoning. Finish with an extra drizzle of olive oil and serve immediately with bread.moro.co.uk This has long been my top fall-back supper: warming, nutritious, quick and indisputably yum-a-licious. Without meaning to sound like a smartypants, I always have homemade chicken stock in the freezer from Sunday roasts, because a decent stock is both the vital background and making of this dish – cube or concentrate just won't do on this occasion. Serves 2500ml chicken stock150g ready-made tortelliniA few slices of red chilli (optional)2 handfuls of seasonal veg such as mange tout or sugar snaps, roughly sliced; courgette, diced; peas or broad beans; french beans cut into batons; or broccoli cut into tiny florettesA large handful of summer herbs, such as basil, mint and parsleyLemon juice, to taste To finish Parmesan, gratedExtra virgin olive oilSalt and black pepper 1 Warm up the stock and, once steaming, drop in the tortellini and pop a lid on the pan. After 3-4 minutes, and when just cooked, add the veg of your choice. 2 When the stock has come back to a simmer, turn the heat off and stir in most of the herbs, some seasoning and a little lemon juice to taste. 3 Ladle into warm, wide bowls and finish with a flourish of grated parmesan, a drizzle of olive oil and the last of the herbs. To order Allegra McEvedy's latest book Around the World in 120 Recipes (Conran Octopus) visit guardianbookshop.co.uk or call 0330 333 6846 Done properly, tuna puree can be creamy and velvety with a lovely, mighty bite. Here it is slathered on top of rye sourdough and studded with soft-boiled quail's eggs, capers, dill, cucumber and celery. Serves 12 quail's eggs1 thin slice of grainy sourdough bread1 tsp capers in vinegar5 thin slices of cucumber8 thin slices of celeryA few sprigs of dill For the tuna puree200g tinned tuna in brine2 tbsp fat-free Greek yoghurt1 tbsp light mayonnaiseJuice of ½ a lemonSalt and black pepper 1 Soft-boil the quail's eggs for 2½ minutes. Peel under running water and halve. 2 To make the tuna puree, put the tuna, yoghurt, mayonnaise and lemon juice in a food processor and blend together to a smooth paste. Season with salt and pepper. 3 Spread a third of the puree on to the sourdough (refrigerate the rest for up to three days). Scatter over the remaining ingredients. Eat straight away. Recipe taken from Skinny Weeks and Weekend Feasts by Gizzi Erskine (Quadrille, £19.99) This is one of my favourite things to eat when I'm on my own, and no one can judge me for being a glutton for pasta. It's sort of inspired by my friend Ali, who likes to throw together unlikely things and see how they turn out, and also by a wonderful Rome-based food blog by the name of Rachel Eats, which finally taught me how to make a proper carbonara, rather than pasta and scrambled egg. Serves 4400g spaghetti or linguine3 tbsp olive oil1 small red onion, thinly sliced2 courgettes, thinly sliced lengthways (a flat peeler is the easiest way to do this)4 eggs50g pecorino cheese50g parmesan, gratedZest of one lemonA small handful of fresh mint or basil, tornSalt and black pepper 1 Put a large pan of salted water on to boil. When boiling, add the pasta and cook for about 8–10 minutes, until al dente. 2 Meanwhile, put the oil into a frying pan over a medium-high heat and cook the onion until softened. Add the courgettes and cook for a couple of minutes to wilt. 3 Beat together the eggs with most of the cheese, the lemon zest and a generous amount of black pepper, reserving a little pecorino to garnish. 4 Drain the cooked pasta, but not too thoroughly, then tip into the frying pan and toss with the courgettes and onions until well coated. Tongs are handy here. 5 Take the frying pan off the heat, add the egg and most of the mint or basil and stir together until the sauce thickens. Garnish with the remaining herbs and cheese, and serve immediately. From Perfect Host: 162 Easy Recipes for Feeding People and Having Fun by Felicity Cloake (Fig Tree). To buy a copy for £14 (RRP £20) visit guardianbookshop.co.uk or call 0330 333 6846